Yes.
If you wish it. Orld and
wordsmith is heard. Well Tom on the show. Yes.
Newport OK here and you heard it right and many of you Chris Voss Jonathan
Sams Simon Dowling that's just a few of the folks who tweeted at us even guessed
it today on the
podcast the world in words is me possible in part not fully just
in part by the National Endowment for the Humanities celebrating fifty
years of excellence not forty nine years of excellence and one you. But
fifty years.
Well done. Comeon humanist transvestite
polyglot and as it turns out pod cast. Listener.
Eddie Izzard is the subject of our podcast today and just to warn you there will be
some explicit language in this pop cast. So if you're listening with the kiddos.
Now's a good time to put in your ear
buds Eddie Izzard stand up is full of bits
about
language but everything that
could do that act with dogs I don't think I'm a doctor I'm faster than anyone ever
had and the
rebels did all this with a language that we know from school is
silly silly billy
language has a knowledge of a bucket of accusative a genitive a date of an
aberrated Fox
all.
But back in the late ninety's. It wasn't enough just to joke about language and he wanted to joke.
In other languages and he joked about that too. I mean how hard is
it really to learn another
language and one thing about speaking language is not rocket science you don't have to invent the fucking one.
That just there you go to look at it and. I got it I want to go and then look it up you
don't have to say well how do we come up with a word for a
cow about how we're going to kill the cat thing you know it's already there.
Just got to learn in different languages
so it's just that easy but perhaps for Eddie
it is. He started doing stand up in French in one thousand nine hundred seven and over
nearly two decades he's gone on to do stand up in German and
Spanish language learning for him is all about confidence. That's at
least what he told me when I spoke with him he had a lot to say about it and a lot to
say very quickly I might
add
I came into comedy is like I'm greedy this is if you want to be a great deal you know. Yeah
I don't need questions as long as we get a language we're going to talk language like yeah you know. So with
English speakers particular things and then with every other
speaker that they might be able to speak a certain language to a certain level but their confidence their
ability might be. Say sixty percent and their confidence
down thirty or twenty percent anyone going to second language third language they have a confidence
level my confidence level in German my billet is about forty. I'm about forty percent fluent
I estimate. My first of a French cake I lost all my ability to talk to him or his well I was just
breaking I was breaking through
English is awful and I didn't know how to do
it
was I have an ear that's got a book
to talk as you know I'm lazy other English people
here now call C.C.'s the.
Basket Well I just said I'm going to talk to both languages OK and then everyone can be fucked up.
Google it by pissed off. You could piss off.
You'll see me stand on the stage with what looks like a bible of. In my head it is
the translation of the entire
show verbiage like you translate it word for word until I gave it to someone to one transcribe
and then to someone else to translate it and then I got it and I will it last and it on
the record throw it down that they are. Now under the noise
of the red haired big brown you know big heavy.
I like war and peace of a thing and I said I'm not learning that I'm just not going to sit there and learn that page by page.
I decided having someone work very hard on it that I would just. I would sort
of wing
it you want to watch I think they've got I'm a good guy but
I just mean you know the number of
your posts. But that
may just say that's good news.
We'll hear a bit. But in the end.
I've worked out now our complete system how to do things with my brother Mark is out is the language actually
speaks French German Spanish pretty fluently. While he's done a year of Russian now so Russians the next one
after Spanish I have to get Spanish
first and then we go for Arabic we were both born in Yemen so yeah you were born in
the colony of Aden should say Odan audible are hardened because.
Yeah we are now I'm hearing my dream is to go back to Adam and do a gig as a civil war
and yeah Cairo is where we're going to go
to and that is the place everyone says get to Cairo. You gotta learn Egyptian army because they do all because
the dialects are quite different and.
GYPTIAN Arabic everyone seems to understand that which I think similar to in
Scandinavia where the Danish and the Norwegians understand Swedish but not the other way round. Probably
because of a lot more television is ten million population in Sweden and
five in roughly five in going to war against an Arabic than Egyptian Eric St I want
to swear I want
the like in French ability said. Which is
the F. word is the F. bomb as you call it in America in France.
I
mean prostitute or I suppose whole social. Oh horse to the horse seller
English colonel and in the right old horse everywhere.
Well anyway I said this perfectly. I got the hang of
this because you think it would be mailed. Yeah yeah exactly but it isn't exactly.
And they do so whenever a song gets really angry and I said it playing in
Paris and that's how my stuff got. And these French guys just looked at me and I
thought wow they're looking at me with that look of he swears like. That is arriving that
is wearing like a like a front Yes well like a native So
you're you have a successful career in English you're doing you know huge arenas was like What
made you decide to do that first French show and then do German and then do Spanish and how many are you doing
now and how many languages.
It's now I've started my fourth I
started Spanish in a better way than one week in Madrid but I do
know the technique now we've got this extreme technique which is I my
brother translates the entire show. Line for line we've got the lines into a very
good second as a loose with the lines of I've changed a lot of the
time but I made it with my brother saying that line
that that line to that line to that i'm he translated the lines and he put it
into good French but not brilliant French. So the equivalent
of English where you say I went down the road I went to have a cup of tea rather than I promenaded
down the the route and thought about
some some vittles for myself you know you're not putting in those words which you know
spoken
language. Yes spoken language real decent spoken language which is better than my
this is the way think people come and see me see the show in French and they see
me deliver you know a really good spoken French show and then they come up in object with
me go. Who doesn't speak that
well you're going to start some fuckin time learning French. What are you doing if you don't speak French of X.
X. X. So I'm going to try you know if you do get pissed off then just
storm out of the army. And that's why i'm not been apologizing. You
know apologized
but that's OK.
Oh then there's a call by the well
I know about seventy five percent drop did you learn in
school like where did you pick yesterday years there he is there but everything has been after that
my radical ideas.
School is good but there's nothing to compare with being in the country deep emotion is the
way emotion is the key thing and I say that one month in
the land is equivalent to two years of training in the
school something like
that I feel like it's impossible to learn another language actually without being like fully immerse I mean you
know I there are other people that are like amazing at language learning. You know you hate you we hate
you how do you do it so well you seem to be one of those but you know no
I don't my motion. I did on the last German show a German show had done two years of school seventy six to
seventy eight only that got
to either be in German in two years or so that was pretty good and I went
back in
twenty fourteen. I think it was fourth Anyway I did two months
that they have a normative General Jones of accusative dative and
genitive therefore
declensions I decided I will not learn those I will not go back and relearn them and apply
them to everything to be different for each word I'm just going to guess them and even them
asking for evidence and using the gas and I'll let the intelligent German people
work out where I'm going wrong and just twist in their heads so I get
it right the sound and the gate
crashing which you quit
smoking shall still suffice if you get
the Eddie
Izzard's comedy is more like a one man show. Yes it feels loose and
conversational but it's actually pretty highly were Hearst. And in fact a lot of the shows have these That's
an elaborate. Entrances even appears out of a book in one of his earlier shows definite article.
So translating his one man show into other
languages seems to have worked out pretty well I read a view of the that
your German show that said quote During force majeure is it gets to grips with.
German sentence structure and declensions earning knowing applause from the Berlin crowd for
his perfect use of the fiendishly tricky genitive case at one
stage I want that's my that's not great. That's a salute to my brother but sometimes I would ad
lib and get it right the genitive but the would
do just because I'd love to ask a cite that I was could cite in
it but I love anything that means excellent and it's you have to go that TS It's that in
the psych unit. So I spent ages saying and I also the web. I'd swear
the middle of
it because it means X. and I'd say X.. I want to say fucking excellent but to act out
fucking Zagnut baby. We've got to do this is fantastic because I think the you're that
do is have these in here in belly and ache with an angle and I've told
you that is one of the boxes ask a fucking Zeisler
baby. And these are the peony you're the pioneers all orders are
to come I tell him the pioneers because they're there watching it. Choosing to go out if one
says there's a different sense of humor Yeah I was going to
that's not true and ot true. The references the different
American references will trip up an American comedian when playing abroad because
if he says and then I hit him with her she's back.
So the net of what's funny is is the same all over the world too much of human
is humor is universal you find though the Germans the French or the
Spanish laugh at different places and
know exactly the same places I have a line that I can I can go through. Three
languages Caesar. Did you ever think I have towards these I think sees it did you ever think you'd end up
as a salad.
People earning the same time or yes this is how we go and in French says a
jammy imagine a. Imagine unusual if you near a on they had finished
up or sell out its Shepherd's salad and in German you got the verb at the end of the sentence
you really think this would throw it or because they put this verb at the end where he goes says I had a a
good actor the everything that I now that he won time outs the lot and then
Villa as solid and that would help.
And still they laugh in exactly the same place. Guaranteed time for time maybe not
mainstream audiences may I did play to a mainstream audience in London who didn't get what I was talking
about was interesting yet
so all you've got to do is have your references universal or explain
your references.
So if you want to talk about her she's which is really not known outside America that we wear Kit Kats are. You can hit some of
the character I accepted but if you said the other thing to her she's by this guy got
her she's made it and there it is and I never remember I know they
exist and then once you've explained. You can talk about it in your comedy the door of our joint
whole show about if you want because people know what it is it's a chocolate that are you know Charlie.
Yeah well you know. Has that mean that universal aspect have or learning all these languages has
it changed the way you approach comedy
has yes I've dumped all puns or are jokes
about saying it with sayings included and
all very British references. Even when you're doing English Oh yeah
because I'm too lazy to change I mean I'm a hard working lazy person.
So the idea that I have a whole set that I do in Britain the whole you know
to twenty eight countries a place now. You never get in Moscow to kids in Moscow going to kids and some Petersburg in
Istanbul in Berlin and I appeal to American
comedians get out there go for it do it play around the world needs now plain English
or just don't do this for all the different languages. OK but assume the
intelligence of the people you're talking to and they will they will work with you if you're making the effort.
There is nothing more humbling like then being in a in a language that you do not speak and learning how to communicate
and realizing that you can
communicate where you can you can get. I'd say catalyst off of the conversation not
sure but you become like
a big home like a child with you know your communication levels run down the children said the
beautiful thing a build up in French and the next show I'm planning
to which I'm hoping to give a Russian name to
Lulu to the Russians. I want to start in
France and develop it on the stage and so they call it a whole day
so we got work in progress do that on the stage so I will actually be adlibbing stuff as I don't
write anything in French letter in French and that will take my French to another level in the first
two weeks of that will be
horrendous that first time that you stood on stage and you did stand up in French were
you terrified I mean was it.
If you don't it's documented. I went backstage and I said that I just
said talk about a hundred times because they've actually been set up on ASP a very closed room
invited
audience just maybe it was it was an invited audience but it was a stage with an
open bar to share with anyone else in the area who wanted to come and drink a big hall
she shaping it
was it was so such a wrong place to
be I panicked about that and then after our country lose and that's because even if I just
stand up there that'll be the brave funniest bravest Yeah it wasn't funny. It was not from their
ass people afterwards and all the bilingual
people know it well and it was and I know I was there. It was I was just
sweating with struggling I couldn't get out but I did it
how long before you felt funny in French.
First I didn't ninety seven in ninety I did a week or so of I
would
guess I would guess about for three or
four gigs into that those first six gigs. I would've started to fall of some of this
is landing in two thousand I did two
weeks and the second week felt
OK so most of you know that a lot.
Also saw that it created you know so much.
Cock to really do the social stupid they go and do this
or that but you
didn't think what he
was name as didn't go.
But the boys. I did a story but it didn't work if
it was never a point I thought that it wouldn't work with the English or because this is a thing in Britain we say which
other if you say in America is the French of the visual sense we just say that one line
all sixty million them they just have a visual
sense you have that you might not know you have the Germans have
no
sense of humor and we got that one I must bear World War two Well one thing but the truth
is there are some Republicans in America who knows and see what people ought to know so human that you
know there's a lot of people in Britain. You know since you know every country you can find all the
no sense of you the people there are some sense of humor people and then there are a strong sense of humor
people and then there's
also so real that you're political who prefer this prefer that for observational there are
no nationalities that own all the fun he wants
is yeah it's like jazz jazz is an
American built style of music but if a brilliant jazz
saxophonist was born in China that great jazz player that
Chinese caters you wouldn't go now you're not allowed to now it's an American thing you. Chinese
have a this sense of music or that sense of music the sense of music is rock'n'roll came out of America but
then the Beatles also well Actually anyone can do it if you want to do it
it's just the sensibility of just the style of
music. It sounds terrifying I mean I guess doing comedy in general
stand up is terrifying and then I think. Taking it in putting in another language terrifying.
Well there's an equivalent of driving. Everyone does it and we went
through that terrifying period stand up to the question of saying here's a comma OK that's the
clutch control OK you can put. Steel is going to be a biting
point. You can use to get shift going these are looking to merit. Check just
driving traffic that's what we
do is it terrifying though to get to white when you're in a car and suddenly like not thinking about driving
so much the point you get no accident because you totally get taken for granted like Tommy does the same
way when I don't think that happens I think people think it's over good but they get really a tune with
it actually you know DRIVER three as have as big John think I can remember while going. I think everyone goes to that place
but doesn't the same mean that unsafe.
I have been driving along having a chat and suddenly come into my my emergency what you're
looking at looking at the decades when you're driving that old driving comes and what you experience you're
just looking at Verity tried hiding in Boston
God yeah we'll try driving London Paris. Paris Grammy out the trail if you have
seven lines and the rules and this and the rule the lines are not mocked. Well they call
people masterful here. Probably not a dry.
Well it's all retarded All right so you know I
think
I may find traffic.
Universally hated. Although ultimately driving is not that terrifying
anymore after many years of doing
it I still am terrified at the thought of standing on
stage in front of thousands of people and being funny and then to be funny
in another language. Forget it but Eddie Izzard he just doesn't seem to have fear but
you posted to me that it all just has to do with
this system that he's developed to reform in a different language.
I can learn three minutes a day of a show like memorization. Yes memorize like
a play happens because I chose well that place is
not so alien to me was when I became either Michael really can do that anyway so I learned it like
a play. So I'll show should take me twenty days of intensive what would
probably means. Which is three weeks project four weeks to because your brain tends
to overheat I mean it really is just sitting bang into your head and then the night when you do it a lot of fall
out of your head.
Have you had a moment on stage or a like are like well you know not
a lot will hire not have I have someone in the wings. With the script. Oh my brother and I
say in German that's better or it's what you say and British that or you say line please.
You just say line and they go. Does the my lot I mean yes yes OK.
Does the My lord I mean use carry on and the audience will just go OK they screwed up there but they
got the line and were on.
I mean doesn't matter. Instead of so much I just says that's
better but the point is once of that then I learn the language that's the weird thing I'm going to learn
to play first because once the play's up and running I can do the gigs I can go out there and then
I can learn how to speak the language but I feel like
your secret weapon is your brother he's a very good secret weapon to have he has a sense of
humor and suddenly realize he's the perfect person to what was a language consultant my
brother's
really strong on grammar and loves being precise with grammar. Whereas me and my manager.
Helen were both communicators first and grammar second. And that's an easy place to
go over if you communicate first and you get your grammar right second then you will plow on
and I always thought that there's two kinds of people the people that are like unafraid of just black and
white thing whatever they were you know just going for it not caring about getting it wrong and I'm OK
for those people right communication first like you but I'm always I'm the opposite I'm like I can
understand everything that's going on I can understand it all but if I'm saying it I'm just terrified
of like X..
It's how much you can smash the humiliation my gift to myself accidently coming out as
transgender thirty years
ago when I walked out the door in one thousand nine hundred five in heels and makeup.
There was so much humiliation coming my way I was just trying to
keep you know just trying to go around town and
be exist and people would turn to you and point. Look whisper
shout scream abuse whatever it was the. Levels of
that but being able to go through that humiliation and it got better and now I don't give a monkeys in
that you know when he shouts anything. And in Britain people know me so it's kind of positive as
in front so I'm not on there and I have had the negative things but I will go and confront the negative things
and the have no fear. Basically you've got
I'm taking my fear level way down but I still sense fear but I
don't but I might it consuming and it's weird Actually I don't if it's necessary a good thing but
when I when I feel I've been salted I will turn around and go back out and go
and stand next to them or confront.
Yeah it's your fight I'm not a fighter. Well yeah you know I want to be in Special Forces when I was a kid.
Seriously I was going to be a paratrooper Marines and then go Special Forces S.A.'s is what they have in
our country and that was my that was a serious considered plan and off of the cadet ship you do
three is they pay for your university and you go off. I don't know whether I would have got into them.
Well what happened why didn't you go that
path because I also wanted to act as also
being transgender that I did that fit in and also which war with they said you have
to I don't know what it was a very clear war. The other one's been less clear.
You know and so I thought OK this moment of ability in this I get I'm going to leave that in a bag and
I'm not I'm just going
to go for the creative side of me but my career is run on military lines.
So you can you know this is tricky being transgender
and being able to play roles like in
Hannibal and Treasure Island and stuff and then tour the world like the Hollywood Bowl Madison Square
Garden tour in four languages. What's tricky about it what it what do you mean.
Well if you list all the people who've done it you notice it's a little tricky because it's not a truck
rather people have done it because it's tricky to put together they won't let you play if you're
transgender and they won't let you play certain old boy roles anymore. Like a
boy or a moden girl now you know and if I'm and I've been trying to do this thing if I
can still play boy because a lot of boys. I think so me and then this go Jim I think so
because there's both genetics I mean I thought I'll just keep playing both things
and and that's a little tricky to pull off
because it's not truck with not a whole thing of hey it's that old transgender thing with tons of people doing
that they were given some of these old some of those old like to do whatever you want to go you
know
I was going to be in the army when I was a kid. Yeah I don't say that people go you know I was
going to be the enemy when I was gay because because if you're trying to bust out you're actually a male told Boy that's where
the sexuality
is yeah it's not it's not drag race now gay men have got that covered
and this is a male tomboy and people do get mixed up and put transvestite
the nude little bit of a crowbar separation thank
you I'm gay man I think would agree. And it's male lesbian.
That's really write it because it's true
because most concepts like fancy go on to women so that's where they are so
running jumping climbing trees putting on makeup when you're on that down
versus
some ideas on the I mean as you might know this is not much Mike of an
Emmy is that they only have an icon look and that's a bit slapdash
geneticist
and I look a
mess. So you conjoin they go No no you're wrong right of
let's say on the right. And they're missing issues your opportunity here because we
all know one of the main elements of attack is the element of surprise.
So
what could be most
surprising than the first Battalion transvestite
brigade
Bomb Wing the ABOL one wing power shooting into dangerous areas with
fantastic Michael.
They're posing forces going fuck about we're going to
god that god god god
god says
we're going
for three of us are such
a prize risk for
the show
yet
the thing is languages company that's hogs some of them a Honda but they're not fond of
it because old mandarin Chinese kids big man or Chinese or Russian kids be rational our kids speak Arabic.
You know you never get a country saying these kids didn't matter managed to get the language so they just
sit in the cone and point to things.
It is that hurdle of humiliation I think
that's yeah the guy that had the cumulation that is the thing that I have given myself accidentally
by realizing I was transgender coming up thirty years ago that I worked
out what it is to work for human ation I can I can add things on to what
I do and go through the
early part of the humiliation when people say you're an idiot for doing that and what you're
doing is rubbish and we hate you for a lot of the I can walk through
that well. Eddie Izzard thank you so much for stopping by and talking with me
today I really appreciate it thank you it was
really
it was really fun. Thanks to Eddie and thanks to you podcast
listeners for tweeting at him and being your supportive selves. We can do anything.
I'm feeling really empowered at the moment.
Who do you want to hear from next tweet at us at Lingle Pod or you can get
me app or C.P. that's P O R Z U C K I and
as always
thanks for
the earth
and the language did you speak and I think that this is
the language has become the lingua franca whatever the fuck that means around the world. It's taken.
Because on this basic level isn't terribly simple. You know we have apples and apples.
I want to laugh so I'm going to give you an apple that. Apple came to me I said your apple of the Apple two the apple by the apple books is just like
an
Apple Apple. And it was apple or happily does Apple offers a
bump someone one of us years ago a bunch and got to get out of
the well but clever levels got no mask this. It's nice to know that we don't usually ask.
It's a bug
and Apple's going
to be sound work
sound works from
P.R.I. it snowed over the weekend or not gotten I'm slurs about
in your search but I think was in my view it sounds pretty good I can hear myself back in the market.
I don't know if they briefed you anything about what the podcast is
but I've listened to you since you going pretty please pretty please can you come up with now you did.
Oh yeah I was thinking casting I was thinking actually oh yeah I think I know a good
contact
with had organs and I look for Madonna on ozone wrench this is already happening.